Current index.html teaching context extracted 2026-10-08. SHA-256 df863f738ae2c69ca0b78e2364bb6c21cc8bc5fc70ed26cacbfb7160578f63bc

OpenerFoundationsSection
Enlarge the Understand AI opening message
Sometimes working with AI feels like having a PhD expert at your side. Other times, it makes a mistake you’d expect from a six-year-old. How can the same tool do both? Understanding what happens inside helps explain why.
Think about driving a car. You can get good at it without ever opening the hood. But knowing what’s happening underneath helps you understand what the car can do and why something might go wrong. The same goes for AI. Knowing how it works helps you Be Smarter Than the Tool.
Under the Hood. Two students examine AI-inspired machinery beneath a car’s open hood. The student on the left points to a symbol control while the student on the right inspects another component with a probe. Knowing how it works helps you Be Smarter Than the Tool.
This section takes you inside the machine, one piece at a time. Some of this will be new to you, but each piece builds on the one before it. You don’t need to memorize every term. The goal is to understand how your words become an answer.
How training builds the patterns AI uses to answer you.
How the information AI has changes what is likely to come next.
How text becomes tokens, and tokens get numbers that represent meaning.
How words affect one another, changing their numbers and the relationships those numbers represent.
How AI builds an answer, why answers vary, and how much math it takes.

TrainingSection
AI can explain chemistry, write code, and help you improve an essay. How did it learn to do those things?
Think about learning to shoot a basketball. You try, see how you did, and make an adjustment. AI also learns through repeated attempts. Let’s follow the process from preparation to a model that is ready to use.
Before Training Starts. Set Up the System: Engineers design the model and give its internal numbers starting values. Training will adjust those numbers as the model learns. Gather the Data: Teams collect books, websites, conversations, code, images, audio, and video. This becomes the curriculum.
Training builds different abilities in three main phases. We’ll use the same basketball question to see what each phase adds.
Three Phases of Training. The same question: How do I shoot a basketball? Phase 1, Pretraining: Learn patterns from data. Phase 2, Instruction Tuning: Learn to follow instructions. Phase 3, Preference Tuning: Improve responses through feedback.
Across all three phases, training follows a basic loop: guess, check, and adjust. What changes is the examples and feedback used to guide those adjustments. Here’s a simple example.
The Training Loop. Training example: “Peanut butter and jelly.” Guess: Given ‘Peanut butter and ___,’ the model guesses cloud. Check: The example says jelly. Compare the guess with that word. Adjust: Adjust the model’s internal numbers to make jelly more likely in this situation. Repeat with more examples. The patterns build.
Those adjustments change the model’s internal numbers, called weights. Now, let’s look at the first phase of training, called pretraining.
1 · Pretraining. What Pretraining Builds. Learning from more text than you could read in 1,000 lifetimes. Across vast amounts of text and code, the model learns patterns in language and information. These patterns help it write sentences, explain ideas, and produce code. The result is a broad foundation that later training can shape into a more useful assistant. What an Answer Might Look Like: “The basketball shot is one of the most fundamental skills in the sport. In this guide, we will cover...” What Still Needs Work: The model can produce fluent text, but it doesn’t reliably follow your instructions yet.
Training keeps adjusting the model’s weights. What changes in the next phases is the kind of examples and feedback used to guide those adjustments.
2 · Instruction Tuning. Learn to Follow Instructions. People provide questions paired with helpful example answers. The model practices answering those questions, comparing its guesses with the examples. Training adjusts its weights so its answers become more like those examples. What an Answer Might Look Like: “To shoot a basketball, square your feet to the hoop, bend your knees, and push up, releasing off your fingertips with a follow-through.” What Still Needs Work: The model can follow a request, but its answer may still be unclear, incomplete, or unhelpful.
Following instructions is a start. Next, the model learns from feedback about which answers people find more helpful. That’s preference tuning.
3 · Preference Tuning. Learn from Feedback. People provide a question, and the model produces several answers. People compare the answers and select the one they think is best, looking for clear, useful, and accurate information. Training adjusts the model’s weights to make answers like the selected one more likely. What an Answer Might Look Like: “Great question! Start close to the hoop. Use one hand to shoot and the other to steady the ball. Bend your knees, then push up as you shoot. Finish with your wrist bent and your fingers pointing toward the hoop. Practice from the same spot before moving farther away.” What Still Needs Work: Feedback helps improve the answers, but AI can still give a wrong answer that sounds right.
When training ends, the model is ready to use. During a normal chat, it uses the weights that training produced. It can work with new information you give it, but your conversation does not change those weights.

AIIsMathSection
What’s the magic that powers ChatGPT, Claude, and every other AI you’ve used? 
A big part of that math is probability: how likely something is. When AI builds an answer, it calculates probabilities for what comes next.
In 1654, two French mathematicians, Blaise Pascal and Pierre de Fermat, traded letters about gambling. Their work helped lay the foundation for modern probability.
Start with something simple: when every outcome is equally likely, you can calculate a probability by counting the possibilities.
The probability formula: ways to get the result divided by total possible outcomes equals probability.
Counting the Possibilities. You toss two coins. What’s the chance that both land on heads? Ways to get two heads divided by total possible outcomes: 1 out of 4 equals 25 percent.
You toss two coins. What’s the chance that 
radial-gradient(circle at 38% 30%, #FBE6A0 0%, #EAC65E 45%, #C9962F 85%, #B5851F 100%)
inset 0 2px 3px rgba(255,255,255,0.5), inset 0 -2px 3px rgba(122,82,20,0.45), inset 0 0 0 2px rgba(189,139,44,0.9), 0 3px 5px rgba(0,0,0,0.16)
0 1px 0 rgba(255,255,255,0.45), 0 -1px 1px rgba(92,58,14,0.35)
New evidence can change the odds. Conditional probability takes that evidence into account.
A Clue Changes the Odds. You toss two coins. Someone peeks and tells you the first coin landed heads. What’s the chance that both coins landed heads now? Two outcomes are ruled out, leaving one way to get two heads out of two possible outcomes, or 50 percent.
You toss two coins. Someone peeks and tells you the first coin landed heads. What’s the chance that both coins landed heads 
radial-gradient(circle at 38% 30%, #FBE6A0 0%, #EAC65E 45%, #C9962F 85%, #B5851F 100%)
inset 0 2px 3px rgba(255,255,255,0.5), inset 0 -2px 3px rgba(122,82,20,0.45), inset 0 0 0 2px rgba(189,139,44,0.9), 0 3px 5px rgba(0,0,0,0.16)
0 1px 0 rgba(255,255,255,0.45), 0 -1px 1px rgba(92,58,14,0.35)
The coins didn’t change when someone peeked. What you knew about them did. That changed the odds from 
AI uses conditional probability to build answers. Your question and the words already written shape the chances of what comes next. Each new word joins that text, and the process repeats.
What Comes Next? You ask: What should I name my new dog? AI’s reply so far: You could name him ____. A few possible next words: Spot 22%, Max 17%, Buddy 14%. Illustrative probabilities. Other possible next words make up the remaining 47%. The question and the words already written shape what is likely to come next.
AI’s reply so far: You could name him ____.
A few possible next words: Spot 22%, Max 17%, Buddy 14%.
Illustrative probabilities. Other possible next words make up the remaining 47%.
The question and the words already written shape what is likely to come next.
A friend just told you something really personal over text and asked what they should do. You think about pasting the whole conversation into AI to get a better answer.
That conversation is someone else’s private information, and it isn’t yours to hand to a tool. Help them as a friend, or point them to someone who can. The AI doesn’t need their secret to be useful to you.
Their private information stays private. If you want to help, do it as a friend. This is a moment to leave the tool out of it.
You’ve had a symptom that’s starting to worry you, and you’re tempted to describe it to AI and just do whatever it tells you.
Your health is a high-stakes call, and AI isn’t accountable for it. It can help you understand options or what to ask, but the decision needs a qualified human who can actually examine you.
Good call. AI can help you understand the basics and what questions to bring. A real professional makes the actual decision when your health is on the line.
An AI assistant drafted an apology email to your coach and offers to send it for you right now, so you don’t have to.
Nothing goes out under your name until you’ve read it. Send is irreversible, and the message lands as if you wrote every word. Read it first, every time.
Good call. The draft is fine to use, but your name is on it, so you check it before it leaves. You stay accountable for what goes out.
You don’t understand how the electoral college works, so you ask AI to explain it three different ways until it finally makes sense.
This is the tool at its best. You’re using it to understand, not to dodge the work, and you’ll show what you learned in your own words. Nothing here says stop.
You could, but you’d be passing up a genuinely good use. Getting something explained a few different ways until it clicks is exactly what AI is great for.

TokenSection
You See a Word. AI Starts With a Number. A person recognizes what the written word cat means. On the AI side, the written word cat becomes token ID 4719. A token ID identifies the token. Meaning comes later.
You know what cat means: fur, whiskers, the animal.
Here, the tokenizer converts the written word cat to ID 4719. The number identifies the token, not its meaning.
A token ID identifies the token. Meaning comes later.
You Use Words. AI Uses Numbers. You ask what the best Avengers movie is, and AI answers in natural language with Avengers Endgame and Infinity War as the leading choices.
That seems counterintuitive, because when you write an email, send a text, or type on your phone, you see words. Behind the scenes, those words are converted to numbers so the computer can work with them.
The same applies to AI. Consider this simple chat:
You sent and received words. How did your words become numbers that AI could work with? And how did AI’s response turn back into words you could read?
One idea is to assign each word in every language a unique number. That way, whatever word you type, AI gets a number.
But that breaks down fast. People keep inventing words, names, and slang. They also make typos and include things like emojis and code. Even a list of a million words couldn’t cover everything a person might type.
Instead, AI uses reusable chunks of text called 
. Think of them as building blocks for language.
What Tokens Look Like. Unbelievable becomes un, belie, vable: 3 tokens. Unusual becomes un, usual: 2 tokens. Unmatchable becomes un, match, able: 3 tokens. These three words reuse un. Basketball becomes basket, ball: 2 tokens. ChatGPT becomes Chat, G, PT: 3 tokens. I ♥ AI becomes I, space plus ♥, space plus AI: 3 tokens. https://www.quickbookstraining.com becomes https, ://, www, .quick, book, str, aining, .com: 8 tokens. SP marks a leading space.
A token can be a whole word or just part of one. The full collection of tokens is called the model’s 
When setting up AI, engineers run a program that analyzes a large collection of text to build the vocabulary. Each token gets a number, its 
. Think of it as an address: it identifies the token, but says nothing about what it means.
What Happens When You Hit Send. Start With Text: You type a question or message. Split Into Tokens: A program called a tokenizer breaks the text into reusable chunks. Look Up Token IDs: The tokenizer finds each chunk’s number in its vocabulary. In this example, unbelievable becomes un, belie, and vable, with IDs 359, 32898, and 24694. Tokenization turns text into token IDs the model can use.
When AI replies, its answer comes out as token IDs. The tokenizer converts those IDs back into pieces of text and joins them together into the answer you read.

EmbeddingsSection
Meaning Becomes an Ordered Row of Numbers. Coke and coffee have colored number tiles on the same six dimensions: Sweet, Bitter, Fizz, Heat, Caffeine, and Dark. Ratings run from 0 to 10. Each position always means the same thing; the number says how much.
One New Dimension Separates Similar Meanings. Coke, Pepsi, and coffee have colored number tiles on a 0 to 10 scale. Coke and Pepsi match on the first six dimensions. Citrus is labeled NEW, with green tiles showing Coke 1, Pepsi 10, and coffee 0. Pepsi’s 10 is emphasized in solid green. Six numbers match. The seventh tells them apart.
minmax(96px, 130px) repeat(5, minmax(58px, 1fr))
You gave more than one club exactly the same scores, so more than one answer fits. To tell those clubs apart, your numerical profiles would need to capture a difference between them.
The numbers alone were enough. You stripped the name off and still found the club, because the values carried its meaning.
That row’s numbers don’t match the values you gave that club. Read the row again and find the club whose profile fits.
Can a row of numbers carry enough meaning for you to recognize something after its name disappears?
Score each club from 0 to 10 on all five dimensions.
Look at each mystery club’s scores. Which club matches the scores?
When clubs have identical scores, the numbers can’t tell them apart. Their profiles need to capture a difference.
You recognized the clubs from their numerical profiles. An embedding gives AI a numerical profile it can use to recognize patterns and relationships in meaning.
You’ve learned that text is converted to tokens, and each has a unique identifier called a token ID. But that’s just a number. It doesn’t say anything about what it means.
It’s the same as the number assigned to your Student ID. It might let you in the building, but it doesn’t tell anyone whether you are funny, into hockey, or the person who steals fries at lunch.
An ID Identifies You. It Doesn’t Describe You. Four students at a cafeteria table wear lanyard badges numbered 1024, 2048, 3072, and 4096. The standing student slips french fries into his shirt pocket. His ID won’t tell you he steals fries.
Imagine you and your friends rate Coke and coffee on six characteristics: Sweet, Bitter, Fizz, Heat, Caffeine, and Dark. Each score runs from 0 to 10. A higher number means more of that characteristic.
If someone asked you, “Which drink scores 9 for Sweet, 1 for Bitter, and 10 for Fizz?” you’d immediately answer Coke.
You’ve turned each drink’s characteristics into a row of numbers that describes it.
, such as Sweet or Bitter. The number in that position is its 
Now add a third drink to the taste test: Pepsi. Score it on the same six dimensions and a problem shows up. Pepsi scores the same as Coke. On these six numbers alone, you cannot tell them apart.
To tell them apart, you add a seventh dimension, 
. In your ratings, Pepsi scores 10 and Coke scores 1. Their numerical profiles now capture a difference the first six dimensions missed.
AI also uses numbers to represent meaning. Just as each drink has a numerical profile, each token has its own row of numbers. That row is called an 
From Taste Ratings to AI Embeddings. Your taste test: three drinks; six, then seven dimensions per row; you choose the ratings (0 to 10); named traits like Sweet and Fizz; you name the dimensions. AI: every token in the model’s vocabulary; typically thousands of dimensions per row; AI learns the values during training (positive and negative numbers, including decimals); patterns in how a token is used; no dimension labels, with values working together to represent meaning. Both use a row of numbers to describe something.
What happens when you type “cat” into AI? Follow its token ID to the matching row in the embedding table.
Inside a Real Model. Token cat has token ID 4719, which selects its highlighted row in the embedding table. The table stores one embedding for every token. Dimensions: the d1 through dn column headings mark positions in the embedding. Value: the circled 0.45 is one learned number, also called a parameter. Embedding: the outlined numerical row is the complete row of numbers for one token.
“Unbelievable” can be split into three tokens: “un”, “belie”, and “vable”. Each piece gets its own embedding, a row of learned numbers.

HowAIReadsSection
When you type a message to ChatGPT, you use words, and it responds with words. Underneath, AI splits your text into small pieces called 
, a row of numbers that represents its starting meaning.
These two examples show how the surrounding words, or 
, shape meaning. AI works with tokens, but we’ll use whole words to make the connections easier to see.
Two Problems Context Must Solve. Different meanings: Please turn on the LIGHT means brightness, while The suitcase is LIGHT enough to carry means not-heavy. Pronouns: The cat drank the milk because IT was thirsty points to the cat, while IT was fresh points to the milk. Context determines which meaning fits.
Our human brains see the right meaning instantly from the surrounding words. For earlier AI, this was a challenge because it read text in order, one word at a time. In longer passages, it could lose track of the earlier words.
How Earlier AI Read Text. The diagram follows the full sentence The cat sat on the mat during the May rainstorm because it was tired. We know IT refers to CAT. Earlier AI often struggled to keep that connection, especially in longer passages.
In 2017, eight researchers at Google published a paper called 
, a widely used architecture for large language models, and the “T” in ChatGPT.
The Transformer reads your whole message at once. In our example, 
 can draw on information from the earlier word 
How a Transformer Reads a Sentence. The complete message arrives together: The cat sat on the mat during the May rainstorm because it was tired. All words are present from the start.
Reading your whole message at once is only the start. AI needs to figure out which words matter and use that information to update the numbers. In our example, 
 to help represent what it refers to in this sentence. Attention and transformation work together to make that happen.
How Context Changes the Numbers. Attention weighs information from relevant words and blends it into the token’s numbers, illustrated by IT connecting back to CAT. Transformation uses learned patterns to further process those numbers, shown as IT after attention becoming IT with context. Attention and transformation work together to build meaning from context.
The model’s learned weights stay fixed. What changes is the row of numbers representing each token in your message.
How the Transformer Resolves Meaning: Different meanings: “turn on” tells us LIGHT means brightness; “carry” tells us LIGHT means not-heavy. Pronouns: “thirsty” describes the cat, so IT refers to the cat; “fresh” describes the milk, so IT refers to the milk. Each panel asks which words provide the clues. Attention and transformation help AI work out which meaning fits.
Attention and transformation also help AI interpret sarcasm, idioms, and even an “it” that points to nothing at all, as in “it was a cold day.”
Reading everything at once creates a problem that reading in order never had. Consider a simple sentence: “Dog bites man.” Same three tokens. Same starting embeddings. But the order carries the meaning.
How a Transformer Keeps Words in Order. The top strip compares Dog bites man with Man bites dog: the same tokens describe different events. Below, Without Position Information shows scattered words; Position Stamps Preserve Order marks Dog as 1, bites as 2, and man as 3. Positional encoding tells the Transformer where every token belongs.

LayersSection
Have you ever read a passage in English class that only made sense after a few reads? Try the sentence below. You might need to read it more than once before the meaning clicks.
AI doesn’t read your message the way you do. It processes your text through a series of 
 work together to update the numbers, helping AI work out what your words mean together. Those updated numbers pass to the next layer. Like rereading a difficult sentence, the process builds on what came before.
, as its numbers change from layer to layer.
AI companies don’t always share how many layers their models use. But published designs give us an idea of the scale: dozens of layers, and sometimes more than a hundred.
The horse sentence took a few reads to untangle. Sarcasm, story twists, and complicated reasoning can take even more work. AI’s layers give it more steps to work through those relationships and build meaning.
Why not keep adding layers? More layers require more computing power and time. The extra benefit has to be worth the cost.

VectorSpaceSection
Each token starts with a row of numbers called an 
. As AI processes your message, the layers change those numbers to reflect the context.
But those new numbers might not match the starting numbers for any token. 
An exact match isn’t necessary. The relationships between the numbers matter too. We can picture those relationships as positions on a map, where nearby positions can represent similar meanings. That’s the idea behind 
A map uses two numbers to describe a position. Comparing positions helps us find the closest match. We can do the same with more than two numbers.
Imagine a taste test where you rate Coke, Pepsi, and hot coffee on seven characteristics. Each drink gets seven numbers, called a 
. Think of those numbers as coordinates that place the drink on a map. We can’t draw all seven dimensions, but a simplified picture shows which drinks are closest.
Neither Mystery Drink had an exact match. But by comparing numbers across all dimensions, you found the closest match. This is the idea behind 
AI uses this idea on a much larger scale. Its embeddings have thousands of dimensions, with values learned during training. We can’t picture a map with thousands of dimensions, but the core idea is the same. After the layers update a token’s vector, it doesn’t need to match another vector exactly. Its position in vector space helps represent its meaning.
In AI, the layers change the numbers to reflect a word’s meaning in a specific sentence. Let’s see how this works in vector space:
 sat on the mat during the May rainstorm because 
 could refer to many things. As the layers process this sentence, they update 
 numbers to carry information connecting it to 
. Changing those numbers also changes its position in 

PredictionSection
When you ask AI a question, it first works out what your words mean together. Then it faces a new problem: how does it begin an answer?
Let’s give AI a simple question and watch how it builds an answer, one token at a time. We’ll show words as single tokens to make the example easier to follow.
Follow one possible reply. At each reveal, watch what joins the answer and what becomes possible next.

InferenceSection
2 quadrillion In-N-Out double cheeseburgers stacked on top of each other, without their wrappers. How tall is the stack?
A double cheeseburger is about two and a half inches tall. Two quadrillion of them stack to roughly 80 billion miles. Pluto sits about 3.7 billion miles away, so the stack blows past it twenty times over.
For two quadrillion burgers to stack just 3 feet, each burger would have to be thinner than a proton. The real stack runs about 80 billion miles: past Pluto, twenty times over.
2 quadrillion coins stacked on top of each other, every one showing heads. How far do they reach?
A coin is about a millimeter and a half thick. Two quadrillion of them reach roughly 1.9 billion miles: about ten round trips between Earth and the Sun.
Seriously? We don’t know where you live, or where your school is. But unless your school is 1.9 billion miles away, it’s not this one. The stack reaches the Sun and back about ten times.
You empty 2 quadrillion cans of Coke. How much liquid is that?
Enough to fill Lake Erie, one and a half times
Enough to fill Lake Erie, one and a half times
At 12 ounces a can, that’s enough Coke to fill Lake Erie about one and a half times. A whole Great Lake of Coke, plus a refill.
Technically correct: it would keep you up late. For the rest of your life. It’s also enough to fill Lake Erie about one and a half times.
If you live to be 100 years old, how many Cokes would you need to drink each day to reach 2 quadrillion in your lifetime?
That’s 55 billion cans a day, every day, for a hundred years: about 634,000 cans every second of your life. Bring friends.
Fair, and technically that does get you out of it. We’re marking it wrong anyway. The answer is about 55 billion cans a day, which works out to 634,000 cans every second, for a hundred years.
The weight of 2 quadrillion horses that ran past the barn and fell.
Correct. Though the other answer is technically true. How do we know this? AI told us. We hope it didn’t hallucinate.
True, actually: two quadrillion horses do weigh about 500 times all life on Earth. But the answer we were looking for is: lots, and who cares. (Also: why did they fall?)
Why can the same prompt produce a different answer? What makes AI’s answers more predictable or more varied? And how much math does one answer require?
You ask AI, “What should I name my new dog?” When AI reaches the name, it calculates a probability for every token in its vocabulary. Spot is the top choice at 22%, so you might expect AI to pick it every time.
But having the highest probability doesn’t guarantee selection. A 22% probability means AI would pick Spot about 22 times out of 100 tries, on average, if the odds stay the same.
Same Probabilities, Different Choices. Spot 22%, Max 17%, Buddy 14%, Rex 9%, Biscuit 6%, and other tokens combined 32%. Five Random Picks: with these probabilities unchanged, one possible set is Max, Spot, Buddy, Rex, and Max. Spot was picked only once, even with the highest probability. Another five picks could turn out differently. The best chance is not a guarantee.
Spot 22%, Max 17%, Buddy 14%, Rex 9%, Biscuit 6%, and other tokens combined 32%. These probabilities stay unchanged across all five picks.
Max, Spot, Buddy, Rex, Max. One possible set. Spot was picked only once, even with the highest probability. Another five picks could turn out differently.
Choosing the most likely token every time can make answers repetitive. Giving other likely tokens a chance adds variety.
Each token AI chooses shapes what comes next, so one different choice can send the answer in a different direction.
 reshapes the probabilities before AI picks each token. In ChatGPT, Claude, and Gemini, it’s handled for you behind the scenes.
Low temperature favors the most likely choices. High temperature gives less likely choices a better chance.
Watch how the same starting probabilities change with temperature.
How Temperature Changes the Odds. For the unfinished sentence You could name him followed by a question-mark box, the starting probabilities are Spot 22%, Max 17%, Buddy 14%, Rex 9%, Biscuit 6%, and other tokens combined 32%. Low temperature concentrates the odds on Spot. High temperature gives less likely choices a better chance. Temperature reshapes the probabilities. It does not change what the model learned.
For the unfinished sentence “You could name him ___,” the starting odds favor Spot. Low temperature concentrates the odds on the most likely choices. High temperature spreads the odds and gives less likely names a better chance.
Temperature reshapes the probabilities. It does not change what the model learned.
Now count what an answer takes. Training created the model’s weights, the numbers that shape every prediction. When you use AI, those weights stay fixed. For each new token, AI uses those weights in a massive set of calculations.
To picture the scale, imagine a model that uses one trillion weights for each token it produces. At roughly two calculations per weight, that would mean about two trillion calculations for one token.
The Math Adds Up Fast. Under a rough estimate, one token requires about 2 trillion calculations, a short answer about 200 trillion, and a longer conversation about 2 quadrillion. Even a short answer takes trillions of calculations.
One trip through our example model’s trillion weights. About 2 trillion calculations.
About 100 tokens written by AI. About 200 trillion calculations.
About 1,000 tokens written by AI across the conversation. About 2 quadrillion calculations.
Even a short answer takes trillions of calculations.
In our example, writing 1,000 tokens takes about 2 quadrillion calculations. That number is almost impossible to picture. These comparisons make it a little less impossible.
Choose the estimate you think is closest.